README.md, before:

# bm25

[![Docs](https://docs.rs/bm25/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/bm25/)
[![Crates.io Version](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/bm25)](https://crates.io/crates/bm25)
[![Crates.io Total Downloads](https://img.shields.io/crates/d/bm25)](https://crates.io/crates/bm25)

A Rust crate that computes [BM25](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Okapi_BM25) embeddings for
information retrieval. You can use these embeddings in vector databases that support the storage
of sparse vectors, e.g. Qdrant, Pinecone, Milvus, etc.

This crate also contains a light-weight, in-memory full-text search engine built on top of the
embedder.

## Features

- Fast
- Multilingual
- Language detection
- Stop word removal
- Parallelism for fast batch-embedding
- Customisable embedding space
- Full access to BM25 parameters

## The BM25 algorithm 

BM25 is an algorithm for scoring the relevance of a query to documents in a corpus. You can make
this scoring more efficient by pre-computing a 'sparse embedding' of each document. You can use
these sparse embeddings directly, or upload them to a vector database and query them from there.

BM25 assumes that you know the average (meaningful) word count of your documents ahead of time. This
crate provides utilities to compute this. If this assumption doesn't hold for your use-case, you
have two options: (1) make a sensible guess (e.g. based on a sample); or (2) configure the algorithm
to disregard document length. The former is recommended if most of your documents are around the
same size.

BM25 has three parameters: `b`, `k1` and `avgdl`. These terms match the formula given on
Wikipedia. `avgdl` ('average document length') is the aforementioned average meaningful word count;
you should always provide a value for this and the crate can fit this for you. `b` controls
document length normalization; `0` means no normalisation (length will not affect score) while `1`
means full normalisation. If you know `avgdl`, `0.75` is typically a good choice for `b`. If
you're guessing `avgdl`, you can use a slightly lower `b` to reduce the effect of document length
on score. If you have no idea what `avgdl` is, set `b` to `0`. `k1` controls how much weight is
given to recurring tokens. For almost all use-cases, a value of `1.2` is suitable.

## Getting started

Add `bm25` to your project with

```sh
cargo add bm25
```

### Embed

The best way to embed some text is to fit an embedder to your corpus. 
```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder, Embedding, Language};

let corpus = [
    "The sky blushed pink as the sun dipped below the horizon.",
    "Apples, oranges, papayas, and more papayas.",
    "She found a forgotten letter tucked inside an old book.",
    "A single drop of rain fell, followed by a thousand more.",
];

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_fit_to_corpus(Language::English, &corpus)
    .build();

assert_eq!(embedder.avgdl(), 5.75);

let embedding = embedder.embed(corpus[1]);

assert_eq!(
    embedding,
    Embedding {
        indices: vec![1777144781, 3887370161, 2177600299, 2177600299],
        values:  vec![1.1422123 , 1.1422123 , 1.5037148 , 1.5037148 ],
    }
)
```

#### BM25 parameters

For cases where you don't have the full corpus ahead of time, but have an approximate idea of the
average meaningful word count you expect, you can construct an embedder with your `avgdl` guess.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder};

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(7.0)
    .build();
```

If you want to disregard document length altogether, set `b` to 0.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder};

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(1.0)
    .b(0.0) // if b = 0, avgdl has no effect
    .build();
```

#### Language

By default, this crate tokenizes text in English. If you are working with a different language,
you can set the embedder language mode.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder, Language};

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(256.0)
    .language_mode(Language::German)
    .build();
```

If your corpus is multilingual, or you don't know the language ahead of time, you can enable the
`language_detection` feature.

```sh
cargo add bm25 --features language_detection
```

This unlocks the `LanguageMode::Detect` enum value. In this mode, the embedder will try to detect
the language of each piece of input text before tokenizing. Note that there is a small performance
overhead when embedding in this mode.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder, LanguageMode};

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(64.0)
    .language_mode(LanguageMode::Detect)
    .build();
```

#### Stop words

By default, this crate removes stop words according to the NLTK stop words list for the
given/detected language before embedding. This removes noise from insignificant words. If you do
not want to remove stop words, disable default features.

```sh
cargo add bm25 --no-default-features
```

If you would rather use the [Stopwords ISO](https://github.com/stopwords-iso) stop words collection:

```sh
cargo add bm25 --no-default-features --features iso_stopwords
```

Stop word lists are provided by the [stop-words](https://crates.io/crates/stop-words) crate. For
more information, see the documentation therein.

#### Embedding space

You can customise the dimensionality of your sparse vector via the generic parameter. Supported
values are `usize`, `u32` and `u64`. You can also use your own type (and inject your own embedding
function) by implementing the `EmbeddingDimension` trait.

```rust
use bm25::{EmbedderBuilder, EmbeddingDimension};

let text = "cup of tea";

// Embed into a u32-dimensional space
let embedder = EmbedderBuilder::<u32>::with_avgdl(2.0).build();
let embedding = embedder.embed(text);
assert_eq!(embedding.indices, [2070875659, 415655421]);

// Embed into a u64-dimensional space
let embedder = EmbedderBuilder::<u64>::with_avgdl(2.0).build();
let embedding = embedder.embed(text);
assert_eq!(embedding.indices, [3288102823240002853, 7123809554392261272]);

// Embed into a usize-dimensional space
let embedder = EmbedderBuilder::<usize>::with_avgdl(2.0).build();
let embedding = embedder.embed(text);
assert_eq!(embedding.indices, [3288102823240002853, 7123809554392261272]);

#[derive(Eq, PartialEq, Hash, Clone, Debug)]
struct MyType(u32);
impl EmbeddingDimension for MyType {
    fn embed(_token: &str) -> Self {
        MyType(42)
    }
}

// Embed into a MyType-dimensional space
let embedder = EmbedderBuilder::<MyType>::with_avgdl(2.0).build();
let embedding = embedder.embed(text);
assert_eq!(embedding.indices, [MyType(42), MyType(42)]);
```

### Search

This crate includes a light-weight, in-memory full-text search engine built on top of the embedder.

```rust
use bm25::{Document, Language, SearchEngineBuilder, SearchResult};

let corpus = [
    "The rabbit munched the orange carrot.",
    "The snake hugged the green lizard.",
    "The hedgehog impaled the orange orange.",
    "The squirrel buried the brown nut.",
];

let search_engine = SearchEngineBuilder::<u32>::with_corpus(Language::English, corpus)
    .build();

let limit = 3;
let search_results = search_engine.search("orange", limit);

assert_eq!(
    search_results,
    vec![
        SearchResult {
            document: Document {
                id: 2,
                contents: String::from("The hedgehog impaled the orange orange."),
            },
            score: 0.4904281,
        },
        SearchResult {
            document: Document {
                id: 0,
                contents: String::from("The rabbit munched the orange carrot."),
            },
            score: 0.35667497,
        },
    ]
);
```

You can construct a search engine with documents (allowing you to customise the id type and
value), or with an average document length.

```rust
use bm25::{Document, Language, SearchEngineBuilder};

// Build a search engine from documents
let search_engine = SearchEngineBuilder::<&str>::with_documents(
    Language::English,
    [
        Document {
            id: "Guacamole",
            contents: String::from("avocado, lime juice, salt, onion, tomatoes, coriander."),
        },
        Document {
            id: "Hummus",
            contents: String::from("chickpeas, tahini, olive oil, garlic, lemon juice, salt."),
        },
    ],
)
.build();

// Build a search engine from avgdl
let search_engine = SearchEngineBuilder::<u32>::with_avgdl(128.0)
    .build();
```

You can upsert or remove documents from the search engine. Note that mutating the search corpus
by upserting or removing documents will change the true value of `avgdl`. The more `avgdl` drifts
from its true value, the less accurate the BM25 scores will be.

```rust
use bm25::{Document, SearchEngineBuilder};

let mut search_engine = SearchEngineBuilder::<u32>::with_avgdl(10.0)
    .build();

let document_id = 42;
let document = Document {
    id: document_id,
    contents: String::from(
        "A breeze carried the scent of blooming jasmine through the open window.",
    ),
};

search_engine.upsert(document.clone());
assert_eq!(search_engine.get(&document_id).unwrap(), document);

search_engine.remove(&document_id);
assert_eq!(search_engine.get(&document_id), None);
```

### Working with a large corpus

If your corpus is large, fitting an embedder and generating embeddings can be slow. Fortunately,
these tasks can both be trivially parallelised via the `parallelism` feature, which implements
data parallelism using [Rayon](https://crates.io/crates/rayon).

```sh
cargo add bm25 --features parallelism
```

## License

[MIT License](https://github.com/Michael-JB/bm25/blob/main/LICENSE)

Commit message:

feat: Allow custom tokenizers
You can now use the crate for embedding only (i.e., bring your
own tokens).

README.md, after:

# bm25

[![Docs](https://docs.rs/bm25/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/bm25/)
[![Crates.io Version](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/bm25)](https://crates.io/crates/bm25)
[![Crates.io Total Downloads](https://img.shields.io/crates/d/bm25)](https://crates.io/crates/bm25)

A Rust crate that computes [BM25](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Okapi_BM25) embeddings for
information retrieval. You can use these embeddings in vector databases that support the storage
of sparse vectors, e.g. Qdrant, Pinecone, Milvus, etc.

This crate also contains a light-weight, in-memory full-text search engine built on top of the
embedder.

## Features

- Fast
- Multilingual
- Language detection
- Stop word removal
- Parallelism for fast batch-embedding
- Customisable embedding space
- Full access to BM25 parameters

## The BM25 algorithm 

BM25 is an algorithm for scoring the relevance of a query to documents in a corpus. You can make
this scoring more efficient by pre-computing a 'sparse embedding' of each document. You can use
these sparse embeddings directly, or upload them to a vector database and query them from there.

BM25 assumes that you know the average (meaningful) word count of your documents ahead of time. This
crate provides utilities to compute this. If this assumption doesn't hold for your use-case, you
have two options: (1) make a sensible guess (e.g. based on a sample); or (2) configure the algorithm
to disregard document length. The former is recommended if most of your documents are around the
same size.

BM25 has three parameters: `b`, `k1` and `avgdl`. These terms match the formula given on
Wikipedia. `avgdl` ('average document length') is the aforementioned average meaningful word count;
you should always provide a value for this and the crate can fit this for you. `b` controls
document length normalization; `0` means no normalisation (length will not affect score) while `1`
means full normalisation. If you know `avgdl`, `0.75` is typically a good choice for `b`. If
you're guessing `avgdl`, you can use a slightly lower `b` to reduce the effect of document length
on score. If you have no idea what `avgdl` is, set `b` to `0`. `k1` controls how much weight is
given to recurring tokens. For almost all use-cases, a value of `1.2` is suitable.

## Getting started

Add `bm25` to your project with

```sh
cargo add bm25
```

### Embed

The best way to embed some text is to fit an embedder to your corpus. 
```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder, Embedding, Language};

let corpus = [
    "The sky blushed pink as the sun dipped below the horizon.",
    "Apples, oranges, papayas, and more papayas.",
    "She found a forgotten letter tucked inside an old book.",
    "A single drop of rain fell, followed by a thousand more.",
];

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_fit_to_corpus(Language::English, &corpus)
    .build();

assert_eq!(embedder.avgdl(), 5.75);

let embedding = embedder.embed(corpus[1]);

assert_eq!(
    embedding,
    Embedding {
        indices: vec![1777144781, 3887370161, 2177600299, 2177600299],
        values:  vec![1.1422123 , 1.1422123 , 1.5037148 , 1.5037148 ],
    }
)
```

#### BM25 parameters

For cases where you don't have the full corpus ahead of time, but have an approximate idea of the
average meaningful word count you expect, you can construct an embedder with your `avgdl` guess.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder};

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(7.0)
    .build();
```

If you want to disregard document length altogether, set `b` to 0.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder};

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(1.0)
    .b(0.0) // if b = 0, avgdl has no effect
    .build();
```

#### Language

By default, this crate tokenizes text in English. If you are working with a different language,
you can set the embedder language mode.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder, Language};

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(256.0)
    .language_mode(Language::German)
    .build();
```

If your corpus is multilingual, or you don't know the language ahead of time, you can enable the
`language_detection` feature.

```sh
cargo add bm25 --features language_detection
```

This unlocks the `LanguageMode::Detect` enum value. In this mode, the embedder will try to detect
the language of each piece of input text before tokenizing. Note that there is a small performance
overhead when embedding in this mode.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder, LanguageMode};

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(64.0)
    .language_mode(LanguageMode::Detect)
    .build();
```

#### Tokenizer

The built-in tokenizer detects language, splits on whitespace and punctuation, removes stop words
and stems the remaining words.

##### Stop words

By default, this crate removes stop words according to the NLTK stop words list for the
given/detected language before embedding. This removes noise from insignificant words. If you do
not want to remove stop words, disable default features.

```sh
cargo add bm25 --no-default-features
```

If you would rather use the [Stopwords ISO](https://github.com/stopwords-iso) stop words collection:

```sh
cargo add bm25 --no-default-features --features iso_stopwords
```

Stop word lists are provided by the [stop-words](https://crates.io/crates/stop-words) crate. For
more information, see the documentation therein.

##### Custom tokenizer

While the built-in tokenizer works well for most languages and use-cases, you can still tokenize
text yourself and use this crate only for embedding.

```rust
use bm25::{Embedder, EmbedderBuilder, Embedding};

let tokens = ["my", "custom", "tokens"];

let embedder: Embedder = EmbedderBuilder::with_avgdl(3.0)
    .build();

let embedding = embedder.embed_tokens(&tokens);

assert_eq!(
    embedding,
    Embedding {
        indices: vec![761702941, 1341939349, 2205492288],
        values:  vec![1.0,       1.0,        1.0       ],
    }
)
```

#### Embedding space

You can customise the dimensionality of your sparse vector via the generic parameter. Supported
values are `usize`, `u32` and `u64`. You can also use your own type (and inject your own embedding
function) by implementing the `EmbeddingDimension` trait.

```rust
use bm25::{EmbedderBuilder, EmbeddingDimension};

let text = "cup of tea";

// Embed into a u32-dimensional space
let embedder = EmbedderBuilder::<u32>::with_avgdl(2.0).build();
let embedding = embedder.embed(text);
assert_eq!(embedding.indices, [2070875659, 415655421]);

// Embed into a u64-dimensional space
let embedder = EmbedderBuilder::<u64>::with_avgdl(2.0).build();
let embedding = embedder.embed(text);
assert_eq!(embedding.indices, [3288102823240002853, 7123809554392261272]);

// Embed into a usize-dimensional space
let embedder = EmbedderBuilder::<usize>::with_avgdl(2.0).build();
let embedding = embedder.embed(text);
assert_eq!(embedding.indices, [3288102823240002853, 7123809554392261272]);

#[derive(Eq, PartialEq, Hash, Clone, Debug)]
struct MyType(u32);
impl EmbeddingDimension for MyType {
    fn embed(_token: &str) -> Self {
        MyType(42)
    }
}

// Embed into a MyType-dimensional space
let embedder = EmbedderBuilder::<MyType>::with_avgdl(2.0).build();
let embedding = embedder.embed(text);
assert_eq!(embedding.indices, [MyType(42), MyType(42)]);
```

### Search

This crate includes a light-weight, in-memory full-text search engine built on top of the embedder.

```rust
use bm25::{Document, Language, SearchEngineBuilder, SearchResult};

let corpus = [
    "The rabbit munched the orange carrot.",
    "The snake hugged the green lizard.",
    "The hedgehog impaled the orange orange.",
    "The squirrel buried the brown nut.",
];

let search_engine = SearchEngineBuilder::<u32>::with_corpus(Language::English, corpus)
    .build();

let limit = 3;
let search_results = search_engine.search("orange", limit);

assert_eq!(
    search_results,
    vec![
        SearchResult {
            document: Document {
                id: 2,
                contents: String::from("The hedgehog impaled the orange orange."),
            },
            score: 0.4904281,
        },
        SearchResult {
            document: Document {
                id: 0,
                contents: String::from("The rabbit munched the orange carrot."),
            },
            score: 0.35667497,
        },
    ]
);
```

You can construct a search engine with documents (allowing you to customise the id type and
value), or with an average document length.

```rust
use bm25::{Document, Language, SearchEngineBuilder};

// Build a search engine from documents
let search_engine = SearchEngineBuilder::<&str>::with_documents(
    Language::English,
    [
        Document {
            id: "Guacamole",
            contents: String::from("avocado, lime juice, salt, onion, tomatoes, coriander."),
        },
        Document {
            id: "Hummus",
            contents: String::from("chickpeas, tahini, olive oil, garlic, lemon juice, salt."),
        },
    ],
)
.build();

// Build a search engine from avgdl
let search_engine = SearchEngineBuilder::<u32>::with_avgdl(128.0)
    .build();
```

You can upsert or remove documents from the search engine. Note that mutating the search corpus
by upserting or removing documents will change the true value of `avgdl`. The more `avgdl` drifts
from its true value, the less accurate the BM25 scores will be.

```rust
use bm25::{Document, SearchEngineBuilder};

let mut search_engine = SearchEngineBuilder::<u32>::with_avgdl(10.0)
    .build();

let document_id = 42;
let document = Document {
    id: document_id,
    contents: String::from(
        "A breeze carried the scent of blooming jasmine through the open window.",
    ),
};

search_engine.upsert(document.clone());
assert_eq!(search_engine.get(&document_id).unwrap(), document);

search_engine.remove(&document_id);
assert_eq!(search_engine.get(&document_id), None);
```

### Working with a large corpus

If your corpus is large, fitting an embedder and generating embeddings can be slow. Fortunately,
these tasks can both be trivially parallelised via the `parallelism` feature, which implements
data parallelism using [Rayon](https://crates.io/crates/rayon).

```sh
cargo add bm25 --features parallelism
```

## License

[MIT License](https://github.com/Michael-JB/bm25/blob/main/LICENSE)
